==== Table 1. Institutions that have generated sensitive species lists and general description of the process. 

[width="100%",cols="31%,39%,16%,14%",options="header",]
|===
a|
[upperalpha]
. {blank}
+
____
*Institutions with sensitive species lists and general description of
the process*
____

| | |
|*Institution and country* |*General description* |*Geographical scope*
|*N species**

a|
ALA^1^

*Australia*

|Compilation of sensitive species lists generated within Australia´s
states and territories. |Australia, New Zealand |5,609

a|
SINP Système d’information sur la nature et les paysages^2^

*France*

|SINP works with both national and local governmental and
non-governmental institutions. SINP has a well-developed data management
protocol that incorporates administrative boundaries and seasonal
variation. |France, Reunion, French Guiana |2,868

a|
SLU Swedish Species Information Centre, SBDI Swedish Biodiversity Data
Infrastructure (SLU Artdatabanken, 2020)^3^

*Sweden*

|SLU publishes its sensitive species list in GBIF with the corresponding
generalization protocols - doi.org/10.15468/jwbtsb |Sweden |130

a|
NBN The National Biodiversity Network^4^

*England*

|Data providers give access to the data through NBN website |England
(and data for Ireland, Scotland) |142

a|
NSSL National Sensitive Species List, SANBI South African National
Biodiversity Institute^5^

*South Africa*

|NSSL is a permanent working group collaborating with SANBI. Robust
documentation related to guidelines and protocols |South Africa |129

a|
e-Bird^6^

*USA*

|International Citizen Science project related to the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology |85 countries |385

a|
iNaturalist^+++7+++^

*Canada*

|Although iNaturalist has recommendations for sensitive species, we
found a list only for Canada |Canada |113

a|
FinBIF ^+++8+++^

Finish Information Facility

*Finland*

|FinBIF (GBIF node) develops sensitive species list through a
collaborative process with other national institutions. |Finland |152

a|
Info species

*Switzerland^9^*

|Integrates different lists developed by institutions such as Ornitho
and Info Flora. |Switzerland |63
|===

*Updated in December 2022; Include species, but also genus and taxa
groups; ^1^https://lists.ala.org.au/[+++https://lists.ala.org.au/+++];
https://lists.ala.org.au/public/speciesLists?&max=25&sort=listName&order=asc&listType=eq:SENSITIVE_LIST[+++https://lists.ala.org.au/public/speciesLists?&max=25&sort=listName&order=asc&listType=eq:SENSITIVE_LIST+++]^;^

^2^https://inpn.mnhn.fr/programme/donnees-observations-especes/references/sensibilite[+++https://inpn.mnhn.fr/programme/donnees-observations-especes/references/sensibilite+++];
^3^https://docs.biodiversitydata.se/sbdi-data/sensitive-species/,
https://doi.org/10.15468/jwbtsb;
https://www.artdatabanken.se/det-har-gor-vi/fynddata/skyddsklassade-arter/[+++https://www.artdatabanken.se/det-har-gor-vi/fynddata/skyddsklassade-arter/+++];
^4^+++https://docs.nbnatlas.org/sensitive-species-list/.+++ The NBN list
compiled includes the list available by NBN, complemented with the lists
from Scotland and Ireland; ^5^ http://nssl.sanbi.org.za/, compiling the
26 non-plant species of the 2018 assessment, and the additional 106
found in the platform in december 2022; ^6^ebird;
^7^https://static.inaturalist.org/wiki_page_attachments/2541-original.pdf;
^8^https://laji.fi/about/709[+++https://laji.fi/about/709+++];
https://cms.laji.fi/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Suomen_Lajitietokeskus_sensitiivinen-lajitieto_lajilista_2021.xlsx[+++https://cms.laji.fi/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Suomen_Lajitietokeskus_sensitiivinen-lajitieto_lajilista_2021.xlsx+++];
^9^InfoSpecies
