=== Table 2. Framework suggested by SANBI to identify sensitive species. The responses “none” and “unknown” are not included, although are considered as potential categories (Adapted from SANBI, 2010, 2018)

[width="100%",cols="19%,15%,66%",options="header",]
|===
|*Element* |*Response scales (categories)* |*Response description*
|*Targeted exploitation* |Small or insignificant |Wild individuals of
the species are known to be utilized*, but utilization is localized
and/or affects only a small proportion of the wild population

| |Significant |Wild individuals of the species are known to be
utilized*, and utilization is widespread, affects most wild populations
and/or is causing rapid decline of the wild population

| |Managed |The species is utilized*, but utilization is sustainably
managed. i.e., the number utilized does not exceed the number produced
by the wild populations. This should be examined on an annual basis

| |Uncertain |No data exists yet showing that the species is exploited
in the wild, however it has one or more relatives or look-alike species
that are known to be utilized, making it highly likely that it would be
exploited for the same purposes.

|*Regeneration potential* |Fast population growth rate |Good chance for
the wild populations to recover from exploitation.

| |Slow population growth rate, or the growth rate varies depending on
habitat |Poor chance for the wild populations to recover from
exploitation OR a collector might feasibly harvest the entire extant
population removing the chance of subsequent recruitment. For example, a
gregarious species with a reproduction system that gathers all nests
together facilitates the extraction of the entire existent population in
a short period of time, removing the chance of subsequent recruitment

|*Population vulnerability* |Population is vulnerable |Size is <=2,500
mature individuals OR the number of known subpopulations is <=5 OR range
is <= 100 km^2^ OR species at risk of localized extinctions

| |Population is not vulnerable |Size is > 2500 mature individuals, AND
the number of known subpopulations is > 5 AND range > 100 km^2^
|===

*Utilization: exploited, collected, traded, or utilized in a targeted
manner
