== Executive Summary and Recommendations

This report provides an overview of existing frameworks for identifying
and generalizing sensitive species data and explores the utility of the
global IUCN Red List of Threatened Species and CITES Appendix lists for
identifying sensitivity in the data. Where we know there are
sensitivities within the data, GBIF-mediated data were assessed to
evaluate the degree to which data publishers are generalizing those
data.

The report identifies a range of well-developed protocols at both
national, through GBIF nodes, and organizational levels for identifying
and generalizing sensitive species. Similar protocols do not appear to
exist for the majority of GBIF´s data publishing community, and there is
an opportunity for GBIF to share best practices more widely within its
community. While it is tempting to use global lists such the IUCN Red
List and CITES to define sensitivity within the data, these global lists
fail to capture sensitivities at more local levels and using these
global proxies may over- or undergeneralize the data, which would affect
both local reuse and global security concerns. National and regional
approaches are encouraged in developing sensitive species data
frameworks.

The majority of species considered sensitive do not have fully
generalized occurrence data, i.e. a proportion of occurrences for these
species will not be generalized. However, occurrence generalization
rates tend to be higher for records of species considered as sensitive
compared with those that are not, and even higher for repatriated
records for species in countries in which they are listed on those
national sensitive species lists. Where they have been generalized, data
are inconsistently generalized between data publishers and the
sensitivity within the data is inconsistently flagged across datasets,
as can be observed for two well known sensitive taxa: the rhinos and
Orchidaceae. More support needs to be provided to data publishers to
ensure future reusability of the data through richer dataset metadata,
fixed vocabularies for those terms commonly used for data generalization
and training support for data publishers on best practices for data
generalization.

It is important to state that with regard to the handling of sensitive
species data, GBIF is ahead of other biodiversity data platforms, most
notably compared to social media, which may not have guidelines or
generalization protocols in place for sensitive species data.. Even with
these relatively well-developed guidelines in place, we would encourage
the use of generalizations as an exception to the rule to ensure that
data remain as informative as possible for future reuse in research and
conservation.

== Introduction

GBIF provides more than 2 billion occurrence records from thousands of
data publishing institutions worldwide, and the data are freely and
openly reused in a range of science and policy applications (Adams,
2017;Angarita-Sierra et al., 2022; Ariño, 2014; Astorga et al., 2023,
Ball-Damerow et al., 2019, Borgelt et al., 2022; Chapman, 2006, 2020;
ENETWILD consortium et al., 2022; Estrada-Peña & de la Fuente, 2014;
Heberling et al., 2021;Heinicke et al., 2021; Hochachka et al., 2012;
Kelling et al., 2009; Lindenmayer & Scheele, 2017; Powney & Isaac,
2015+++;+++ Robinson et al., 2020; Saarenmaa, 2005; Soberón & Peterson,
2004; Tang et al., 2021; Thompson et al., 2021; Wood et al., 2011; Xing
et al., 2019). This data can be sensitive in nature, revealing
localities of species that could increase threats to individuals or
populations. In recognition of this, GBIF provides robust documentation
- the guide to best practices for generalizing sensitive data (Chapman,
2020) - to assist data publishers to generalize their data in a way that
is consistent with the principles of open data.

Despite these active efforts by GBIF to provide guidance and standardize
the process for generalizing sensitive data, concerns are still
regularly raised about the possible availability of sensitive data. In
parallel, there is an increasing awareness at a national level of the
importance of restricting access to some sensitive data. Finding the
balance between free and open data at resolutions that are useful for
answering scientific questions and generalizing or restricting data for
reuse to ensure that data is not used for nefarious purposes is a
challenge (Contreras-Díaz et al., 2023).

In this report, we investigated existing approaches for identifying
sensitive species data and examined how sensitive data within GBIF is
currently being managed, with a view of identifying best practices
within the GBIF community. Based on these findings, we explored
potential improvements that can be made within the data publishing
workflow to facilitate the publication and reuse of sensitive species
data to ensure that data are as precise as possible, and as generalized
as needed.

*_Sensitive species_* are defined in this report as taxa potentially
threatened by targeted use e.g. hunting, collection, pet trade, or
through human disturbance e.g. wildlife watching. *_Sensitive species
data_* is defined here as any _data_ which, if released to the public,
could potentially result in adverse effects on the populations or
individuals of sensitive species. We have not focused on other potential
reasons for sensitivity within the data, including biosecurity and
traditional knowledge, while understanding that these factors should be
considered in future discussions on sensitive data. The acquisition of
data for all analyses was completed in January 2023.

== Institutional Acronyms

INPH: Inventaire National du Patrimoine Naturel (France)

SINP: Système d’information sur la nature et les paysages (France)

NSSL: National Sensitive Species List (South Africa)

SANBI: South African National Biodiversity Institute

NBN: The National Biodiversity Network (England)

ERIN: Environmental Resources Information Network (Australia)

GBIF: Global Biodiversity Information Facility

ALA: the Atlas of Living Australia

== Defining sensitive species

Without a good understanding of the potential threats to a species, one
of the first hurdles for a data publisher is making a decision on which
data should be considered sensitive and thus generalized. The question
is: will publishing those data on that species at a specific moment in
time increase the risk to that species from targeted exploitation? In
this section we explore the landscape of frameworks that exist between a
number of data publishers and GBIF nodes for the identification and
generalization of sensitive species data.

=== Organizational and National/Subnational Sensitive Species Data Frameworks

The identification of potentially sensitive species and sensitive data
may take diverse approaches and frameworks, ranging from simple binary
decision to more complex multi step processes (e.g. SANBI, 2018; SINP,
2017). The elaboration of sensitive species lists are, in general,
collaborative in nature, and their level of complexity varies between
countries and organizations. For example, organizations such as SINP
(France) and SANBI (South Africa) have established working groups that
develop sensitive species lists and their associated generalization
protocols (Table 1). Some of these working groups allow for these
processes to be consultative and across a broad range of stakeholders.
SANBI and iNaturalist also provide user feedback mechanisms with which
the user community can inform those organizations regarding concerns
about the classification of species as sensitive. These lists are often
dynamic and reflect current changes to pressures at national or regional
levels. For example, SANBI´s working group periodically reviews the list
as new information becomes available, resulting in a dynamic list where
the number of species can change (504 in 2010, reduced to 129 in 2018)
and a watchlist of genera which could become sensitive in the future
(SANBI, 2010, 2018). Only a few institutions, however, provide full
documentation of these processes. For example, SANBI was identified as
having a particularly well-developed set of documentation (SANBI, 2010,
2016, 2018).

==== Table 1. Institutions that have generated sensitive species lists and general description of the process. 

[width="100%",cols="31%,39%,16%,14%",options="header",]
|===
a|
[upperalpha]
. {blank}
+
____
*Institutions with sensitive species lists and general description of
the process*
____

| | |
|*Institution and country* |*General description* |*Geographical scope*
|*N species**

a|
ALA^1^

*Australia*

|Compilation of sensitive species lists generated within Australia´s
states and territories. |Australia, New Zealand |5,609

a|
SINP Système d’information sur la nature et les paysages^2^

*France*

|SINP works with both national and local governmental and
non-governmental institutions. SINP has a well-developed data management
protocol that incorporates administrative boundaries and seasonal
variation. |France, Reunion, French Guiana |2,868

a|
SLU Swedish Species Information Centre, SBDI Swedish Biodiversity Data
Infrastructure (SLU Artdatabanken, 2020)^3^

*Sweden*

|SLU publishes its sensitive species list in GBIF with the corresponding
generalization protocols - doi.org/10.15468/jwbtsb |Sweden |130

a|
NBN The National Biodiversity Network^4^

*England*

|Data providers give access to the data through NBN website |England
(and data for Ireland, Scotland) |142

a|
NSSL National Sensitive Species List, SANBI South African National
Biodiversity Institute^5^

*South Africa*

|NSSL is a permanent working group collaborating with SANBI. Robust
documentation related to guidelines and protocols |South Africa |129

a|
e-Bird^6^

*USA*

|International Citizen Science project related to the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology |85 countries |385

a|
iNaturalist^+++7+++^

*Canada*

|Although iNaturalist has recommendations for sensitive species, we
found a list only for Canada |Canada |113

a|
FinBIF ^+++8+++^

Finish Information Facility

*Finland*

|FinBIF (GBIF node) develops sensitive species list through a
collaborative process with other national institutions. |Finland |152

a|
Info species

*Switzerland^9^*

|Integrates different lists developed by institutions such as Ornitho
and Info Flora. |Switzerland |63
|===

*Updated in December 2022; Include species, but also genus and taxa
groups; ^1^https://lists.ala.org.au/[+++https://lists.ala.org.au/+++];
https://lists.ala.org.au/public/speciesLists?&max=25&sort=listName&order=asc&listType=eq:SENSITIVE_LIST[+++https://lists.ala.org.au/public/speciesLists?&max=25&sort=listName&order=asc&listType=eq:SENSITIVE_LIST+++]^;^

^2^https://inpn.mnhn.fr/programme/donnees-observations-especes/references/sensibilite[+++https://inpn.mnhn.fr/programme/donnees-observations-especes/references/sensibilite+++];
^3^https://docs.biodiversitydata.se/sbdi-data/sensitive-species/,
https://doi.org/10.15468/jwbtsb;
https://www.artdatabanken.se/det-har-gor-vi/fynddata/skyddsklassade-arter/[+++https://www.artdatabanken.se/det-har-gor-vi/fynddata/skyddsklassade-arter/+++];
^4^+++https://docs.nbnatlas.org/sensitive-species-list/.+++ The NBN list
compiled includes the list available by NBN, complemented with the lists
from Scotland and Ireland; ^5^ http://nssl.sanbi.org.za/, compiling the
26 non-plant species of the 2018 assessment, and the additional 106
found in the platform in december 2022; ^6^ebird;
^7^https://static.inaturalist.org/wiki_page_attachments/2541-original.pdf;
^8^https://laji.fi/about/709[+++https://laji.fi/about/709+++];
https://cms.laji.fi/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Suomen_Lajitietokeskus_sensitiivinen-lajitieto_lajilista_2021.xlsx[+++https://cms.laji.fi/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Suomen_Lajitietokeskus_sensitiivinen-lajitieto_lajilista_2021.xlsx+++];
^9^InfoSpecies

Some citizen science projects have also developed their own protocols
and lists. eBird and iNaturalist categorize sensitivity within the data
for specific countries and taxa based on community consultation. Both
initiatives are already implementing sensitive data policies, eBird in
2017 and iNaturalist in 2011 (Glaser, 2019; iNaturalist, 2022).
iNaturalist automatically obscures species on its own sensitive species
list, such as observation of certain orchids (iNaturalist, 2023).
iNaturalist community helps inform which taxa should have a taxon
geoprivacy set by flagging taxa. In addition, iNaturalist encourages
publishers to set geoprivacy settings to "obscured" for any records that
they feel are sensitive. For obscured observations, the latitude and
longitude are moved to private latitude and private longitude fields
which are not publicly visible and the publicly available accuracy is
increased to the diagonal of a 0.2 x 0.2 degree cell (~500 km2 at the
equator). Latitude and longitude are replaced with a random point within
this cell. In some regions, iNaturalist also works at the national
level, to harmonize their global approach with national approaches. For
example, in Canada, iNaturalist has a working group, which works with
NatureServe Canada's Conservation Data Centers who establish and
maintain the conservation statuses for each province and territory
(except Quebec).

In this report we assessed these different frameworks against Chapman´s
framework to see to what extent these elements are addressed across
different organizations´ frameworks (Appendix 1 Table S1). The two major
elements of Chapman´s framework are below, with sub-components of the
framework in bold italics:

* {blank}
+
____
Is the taxon that we are publishing data on sensitive? i.e:
____
** {blank}
+
____
Is the taxon at *_risk of harm_*?
____
** {blank}
+
____
What will be the *_impact of the harm_*?
____
** {blank}
+
____
What is the *_conservation status_* of the species?
____
* {blank}
+
____
Will the publication of the data increase potential harm to the taxon?
i.e.:
____
** {blank}
+
____
Does the *_taxon exhibit features_* that make release of that data
potentially harmful to that taxon?
____
** {blank}
+
____
Will the *_release of the data_* increase the probability of harmful
activities?
____

Among the different guidelines and literature reviewed, the most widely
used elements for identifying sensitive species data were the risk of
harm and the conservation status, with further refinement following
national stakeholder consultations. Most of the institutions referred to
the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (e.g., DRYAD), and others also
applied local and national assessments of conservation status (ALA,
2018; SANBI, 2016). For risk of harm, threats identified within the
frameworks related to the use of the species, the economic value of the
targeted species, or how interesting specific groups found them (e.g.,
wildlife watchers). With respect to conservation status, for some
organizations this was the only criterion used.

The assessment of the *_impact of harm_* is not simple and the
establishment of thresholds at which a specific activity can be viewed
as a major threat remains unclear, in particular for cases with multiple
threats. Based on the precautionary principle, institutions such as SINP
do not necessarily require robust evidence of population susceptibility
and may use knowledge of the effects of the threats on closely-related
species to inform decisions on which species would be considered
sensitive (SINP, 2014). SANBI has developed a set of well-defined
criteria for assessing impacts of harm: exploitation extent; targeted
demographic; regeneration potential; and population vulnerability
(SANBI, 2010, 2018, Table 2). The criteria account for how harmful
activities would affect a species given its ecology, demographics and
exploitation intensity over time, providing the most robust attempt to
qualify the impact of harm on species across all frameworks.

=== Table 2. Framework suggested by SANBI to identify sensitive species. The responses “none” and “unknown” are not included, although are considered as potential categories (Adapted from SANBI, 2010, 2018)

[width="100%",cols="19%,15%,66%",options="header",]
|===
|*Element* |*Response scales (categories)* |*Response description*
|*Targeted exploitation* |Small or insignificant |Wild individuals of
the species are known to be utilized*, but utilization is localized
and/or affects only a small proportion of the wild population

| |Significant |Wild individuals of the species are known to be
utilized*, and utilization is widespread, affects most wild populations
and/or is causing rapid decline of the wild population

| |Managed |The species is utilized*, but utilization is sustainably
managed. i.e., the number utilized does not exceed the number produced
by the wild populations. This should be examined on an annual basis

| |Uncertain |No data exists yet showing that the species is exploited
in the wild, however it has one or more relatives or look-alike species
that are known to be utilized, making it highly likely that it would be
exploited for the same purposes.

|*Regeneration potential* |Fast population growth rate |Good chance for
the wild populations to recover from exploitation.

| |Slow population growth rate, or the growth rate varies depending on
habitat |Poor chance for the wild populations to recover from
exploitation OR a collector might feasibly harvest the entire extant
population removing the chance of subsequent recruitment. For example, a
gregarious species with a reproduction system that gathers all nests
together facilitates the extraction of the entire existent population in
a short period of time, removing the chance of subsequent recruitment

|*Population vulnerability* |Population is vulnerable |Size is <=2,500
mature individuals OR the number of known subpopulations is <=5 OR range
is <= 100 km^2^ OR species at risk of localized extinctions

| |Population is not vulnerable |Size is > 2500 mature individuals, AND
the number of known subpopulations is > 5 AND range > 100 km^2^
|===

*Utilization: exploited, collected, traded, or utilized in a targeted
manner

Whether the publication of the data would increase potential harm to the
species, which is the second element of Chapman´s framework, was not as
widely used within the frameworks for determining the sensitivity of the
data. Not all ungeneralized occurrence data of a sensitive species may
pose a direct risk to populations of that species. For some species,
even with precise knowledge of its location, its discovery is unlikely.
This probability of finding the species again has been defined as its
*_detectability_* (Bailey et al., 2004), and depends on factors
including species mobility, home range, sociality, cryptic behaviours,
local population density and territoriality (Bailey et al., 2004; Kéry &
Schmid, 2004). For example, the elusive and critically endangered Andean
Cat (_Leopardus jacobita_) was recently recorded from a novel location
in central Chile in 2018 as part of a camera trap monitoring program
(GEF Montaña, 2018). However, despite continuous intensive fieldwork,
the efforts to capture a new photo at the same location were
unsuccessful. The cat was photographed again, but several months later
and in a station a few kilometres away (Figure 1). In this example, the
delivery of a precise location may not represent a significant risk for
the species. In contrast, species with smaller distributions (e.g., a
frog in a wetland), high densities and lower mobility may be easier to
find. Chapman (2006) suggested that herbaria are more inclined to
restrict their data, which coincides with our own results i.e.
occurrence records of plant species tend to be more generalized (see
below). Even though we cannot assume a straightforward correlation, we
might assume that, at least in part, data generators may perceive higher
risks related to the lack of mobility of plants. Incorporating an
estimation of the species detectability may improve the choice of
corresponding spatial buffers to be applied for data generalizations. In
species with lower mobility, smaller home ranges and/or behavioural
traits or habits that lead to reduced movements of individual (e.g.
philopatry), occurrences may be very precise and, yet, not increase
threats to individuals . Some ecological studies and surveillance
programs have incorporated detectability in their protocols, identifying
species that require major efforts to be found (or re-detected) (Efford
& Schofield, 2022; Howe et al., 2022; Theng et al., 2022; Tourani,
2022). Including this element may be key to securely deliver more
precise location information.

The *_accessibility_* of the location from which the species was
recorded may also limit the impact of publishing ungeneralized data.
Access to certain locations may only be possible with appropriate
permits, training and/or equipment. For example, the burrowing parrot
(_Cyanoliseus patagonus_) build their nests in cliffs along river banks
in the Andes. Similarly, the long-flowered fescue (_Patzkea paniculata_
subsp. _longiglumis_) is only known in France from one station in the
Pyrénées-Atlantiques, located within rocky escarpments (SINP, 2022).

image:media/image4.jpg[image,width=434,height=326]

Figure 1. Camera trap shot of an Andean Cat (_Leopardus jacobitus_). A
first photo was obtained in 2018, in the protected area Cascada de las
Animas and represented the southernmost record of this endangered
species at that point in time. The following efforts of camera trap
monitoring to detect the cat again in the same station were
unsuccessful. After months, only two more records were obtained, but at
stations located >1 km apart (Photo: Chagual Orrego, GEF Montaña
Project, 2018).

The *_novelty_* of the data, i.e. an occurrence of a species in a
location not previously reported, can also increase its sensitivity;
however, identifying truly novel data points is not a straightforward
process. For example, if a species is known to occur in a province of a
country with an area of 7,000 km², would it be safe to publish precise
location information of this species within that province? Is that
record considered a _novel location_ or not? Angarita-Sierra et al.
(2022) attempted to address this issue in Colombia. For snakes, the
authors compared “novel” data to data mediated by GBIF, and defined
“novel” as a record that occurs outside a buffer of 50-100 km from
previously published locations. Records falling outside buffers
represented range extensions and, thus, truly novel data. This example
highlights the difficulties in finding an approach to define what would
be considered a novel location that may increase threat or, in contrast,
if the data point does not represent novel information, falling within a
known species´s distribution. The relevance of these records located in
known distribution is that they may contribute with valuable ecological
information of population dynamics along time.

=== The complementarity between national/regional lists and global lists 

Good examples exist of well-developed sensitive species data frameworks
that allow for the identification of sensitive species on which data
generalization protocols can be applied. However, these frameworks and
guidelines are limited to a handful of countries or taxonomic groups
(Table 1). Given these large geographical and taxonomical gaps in our
knowledge of where sensitivity may lie, we explored the utility of
developing a global trigger lists that could be used to flag those taxa
where we might expect sensitivity in the data. For this, we used the
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (often cited as a reference for the
development of national sensitive lists) and the CITES Appendices
(Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species). We wanted to
investigate to what extent the signal within an IUCN-derived and a
CITES-derived sensitive species checklists were reflected within
national and organizational lists. If national and organizational
sensitive species lists reflected the signal within these global lists
then these global lists could potentially serve as useful indicators of
sensitivity within data that could be used as references for data
managers of sensitive taxa for generalization.

For the IUCN Red List, we identified potentially sensitive species if
“biological resource use” had been recorded as a threat to the species
under the IUCN´s Threat Classification Scheme (IUCN, 2022), only
including those subcategories in which the biological use was classified
as “intentional, species is the target”. This was deemed to be the
threat classification that was most likely to identify taxa that would
be subject to targeted hunting, gathering, harvesting, or other similar
activity that may result in increased species data sensitivity. From the
near 150.000 species currently assessed in the IUCN Red List, we found
12,890 potentially sensitive species excluding those species where the
threat from biological resource use could not be directly attributed to
the species. From this IUCN-based list, 40 per cent of the species were
categorized as Least Concern, and the remaining as Data Deficient (6.7
per cent), Near Threatened (11.3 per cent) or threatened (Vulnerable
17.0 per cent, Endangered 15.9 per cent, Critically Endangered 8.6 per
cent). For CITES-listed species, we included the 53,063 species under
the three Appendices as potentially sensitive species.

From the 9 institutional sensitive species lists we were able to
retrieve (Table 1), we compiled 9,232 sensitive taxa covering 91
countries (Appendix 2 Figure S1). In some cases, sensitivity was defined
not for a species, but for a genus, subspecies or a variety (e.g.,
_Acriopsis_ sp., _Gasteria pillansii_ var. _Hallii, Asplenium_ x contrei
Calle__)__. After matching taxonomic names using the GBIF Species
taxonomic matching tool, we recognized 8,368 species. From these, 5,715
(68.3 per cent) were listed as Not Evaluated (NE), and 532 were not
found in the IUCN Red List. Of the remaining species listed, 14.3 per
cent were considered as Least Concern, 1.8 per cent as Near Threatened,
3.5 per cent Vulnerable, 3.5 per cent Endangered and 2.2 per cent as
Critically Endangered. Compilation of the list from the institutions was
hindered due to the unstandardized list formats provided (e.g.,
exportable excel or csv files, pdf, text in the web page) and due to
taxonomic mismatches between the organizational lists, the IUCN and the
GBIF taxonomic backbone.

If we look at the taxonomic composition of the compiled national and
organizational list, 62.3 per cent of taxa are plants as compared to 33
per cent for those species on the IUCN Red List identified as being
threatened by biological resource use. The value of 33 per cent is in
contrast to the fact that 41 per cent of all taxa on the IUCN Red List
are plants and thus could reflect a lower threat to plants from
biological resource use, or could be explained by an incomplete
assessment of plant species threatened by biological use, highlighting a
potential need for updating assessments to adequately reflect threats to
species (Auliya et al., 2016; Siler et al., 2014). It is also important
to note that in the Atlas of Living Australia sensitive species list
there was a large number of plant species (4,161 species) that skewed
the taxonomic composition of the compiled national and organizational
list towards plants. For CITES-listed species, 84.6 per cent are plants
although this may be due to the fact that two large plant taxa are
included in the CITES-lists, notably Orchidaceae (34,354 species). The
CITES-list also demonstrates taxonomic biases or gaps. For example,
reptiles have been widely recognized as susceptible to over-exploitation
by unsustainable pet trade; however, the trade of fewer than 8 per cent
of reptile species are regulated by CITES (Auliya et al., 2016;
Schlaepfer et al., 2005).

When we compared the taxonomic coverage of the IUCN-derived sensitive
list (species threatened by biological resource use), the CITES-derived
list, and the compiled national and organizational list, we found little
agreement. From the 9,232 taxa identified in the compiled national and
organizational list, only 220 (2.5 per cent) were found on the list of
12,890 species obtained from the IUCN-derived list (representing 1.7 per
cent of species). Therefore, only a few species identified through the
IUCN threat scheme enables the identification of species listed as
sensitive at national or regional levels. The use of the IUCN threat
classification scheme would be identifying those species at risk of harm
at a global level, and not assessing the intensity of the harm at a
local scale, reflecting that the threat of biological use would not be
uniform over a species´ global distribution. Therefore, the use of
biological use in the global IUCN threat classification scheme may over-
or underestimate this threat of use at a local scale as the intensity of
the threat has not been assessed locally. This is in contrast to
national or organizational sensitive species lists where sensitive
species are identified using a set of locally-relevant criteria and
stakeholders.

When we compared the CITES-derived list of species whose trade is
regulated internationally with the compiled national and organizational
sensitive species list, 1,200 species appear in both (nearly 13per cent
of the species included on the compiled national and organizational
sensitive species list). While higher than the filtered IUCN Red List,
this number still remains relatively low. Comparisons here are difficult
though as a large number of taxa on the CITES appendices are not
distributed in the countries for which we have sensitive species lists.
If we take just the Orchidaceae for example, with over 34,000 species,
most of these species are found in countries without sensitive species
lists. The fact that there is some signal in our globally
unrepresentative compiled national and organizational list suggests that
there may be some utility in using CITES-derived lists for identifying
sensitive species, but further exploration is needed in order to define
sensitivity at national or regional levels.

The large number of species identified as sensitive in institutional
lists and not reflected in the IUCN-based lists was unexpected,
highlighting how different approaches at different scales provide
different insights. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, while
useful in identifying species at higher risk of extinction on which
publishers may want to generalize data, it does not sufficiently reflect
national context to be able to be used generically as a global trigger
list. The CITES Appendices potentially provide more information,
however, this should be explored following consultation with GBIF nodes
and the wider conservation community. Global lists cannot replace
national/regional/organizational processes to adequately capture where
there may be sensitivity in the data. In a GBIF survey aimed at data
publishing organizations within GBIF (Chapman, 2006), publishers were
able to identify local pressures on species based on their own
experience for example illegal falconry, collection and baiting
(badgers) and important local taxa including amphibians and reptiles,
ferns, orchids, cycads, succulent plants and cacti. In one territory, a
respondent responded that “digging up of rare plants has not been a
problem until now”. This understanding of local contexts and priorities
is difficult to disaggregate from global lists .

== Sensitive Species Data Management in GBIF

In Chapman (2020) generalization refers to any modification performed on
source data that conceals sensitive content, which could be related to
text data (name of the area, collector, landowner) or spatial
generalizations. For data published through GBIF, the responsibility of
generalization is left to the data publisher. In a survey of data
holders by GBIF (Chapman, 2006), two thirds of respondents (65) reported
that they generalize data in some way, mostly by deleting or altering
localities (42), deleting or decreasing the scale of the georeference
(41), modifying the accuracy (1), whereas all the other generalizations
were related to non-spatial elements such as collectors name, dates, and
taxonomic information.

One of the most common practices used in the management of sensitive
data is to generalize the spatial locality or geographic coordinates
(Chapman and Wieczorek 2020). Spatial generalization typically consists
of reducing the precision of the data through generalization to a grid
(metric or geographic), or polygon (e.g., circle, administrative
boundaries, biogeographic region, watershed). These generalizations
carry with them a coordinate uncertainty that will be a function of
numerous factors including coordinate precision, GPS accuracy, data
source and measurement errors (Bloom et al., 2020; Chapman & Wieczorek,
2020; Wieczorek et al., 2004). This coordinate uncertainty defines the
geographic limits around the point from where the specimen was most
likely collected, usually described in metres or kilometres (Bosman et
al., 2021). In Appendix 3 Table S2, we summarize some of the
recommendations of organizations examined in this analysis.

The generalization of georeferenced data should be documented so that
users can evaluate the data’s fitness for use (Chapman & Wieczorek,
2020). Omitting this information may considerably reduce the value of
the data for analysis, with users often unaware that the data has been
modified (Bosman et al., 2021). For example, higher spatial
uncertainties may lead to a lower robustness of species distributional
models (Contreras-Diaz et al., 2023). In order to maintain data quality,
reliability and promote reuse, generalization should be documented in a
standardized way (Chapman & Wieczorek, 2020). In addition, uncertainties
due to the methodology used to obtain the occurrence data, for example,
should also be documented independently of any data generalization
applied (Chapman and Wieczorek 2020).

The extent to which data holders and publishers are applying general
GBIF and national data generalization protocols is unknown. It is
unclear whether those data that are considered sensitive data are being
generalized in a standardized manner both within and outside of a
country where that species occurs. In this section, we evaluate the
degree to which sensitive data is being generalized and the extent to
which data generalization protocols are being applied across different
geographies and organizations. Finally, we provide examples of how data
is currently generalized for some well-known sensitive taxa.

=== Application of data generalization protocols within GBIF

In its broadest sense, generalization introduces uncertainty in the
location data of an occurrence. Currently, this uncertainty can be
captured mainly through five DwC terms : _datageneralizations_ (DG),
_informationwithheld_ (WH), _CoordinateUncertaintyInMeters_ (UNC),
_CoordinatePrecision_ (CP__)__ and _Footprint_ (FT) (See
https://dwc.tdwg.org/terms/). Of these five terms, Chapman & Weiczorek
(2020) recommend the use of DG and WH for generalizations related to
sensitive species data. We took the broader definition and looked at the
use of the 5 terms for taxa listed as potentially sensitive, based on
our compiled national and organizational list and the list derived from
the IUCN Red List to determine how data generalizations were being
applied to these subset of taxa in GBIF.

These two lists of sensitive and potentially sensitive species resulted
in 21,098 validated taxa (20,205 species recognized by the GBIF Matching
Species Tool). As a first step, we retrieved occurrence data from GBIF
using the following filters: occurrences after 1970, with coordinates
and excluding records based on fossil specimens, material sample, and
living specimens. We retrieved 386 million occurrence records for taxa
on any of the two lists (this included records for 117 genera that were
listed on national lists) (GBIF.org (27 November 2023) GBIF Occurrence
Download
https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.gvxuzs[+++https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.gvxuzs+++]).

In a second step, to explore generalization patterns for sensitive and
potentially sensitive species, we filtered the list of potentially
sensitive species to only include those in threatened categories
(CR,EN,VU) or Near Threatened (NT). We considered that this filter could
serve as a potential trigger list for identifying those taxa for which
publishers might consider generalizing data. With this filter, we
obtained nearly 38 million records for 5,728 species. From the national
and organizational lists we obtained 13.9 million occurrences for 258
species, and based on the IUCN-derived list, we obtained nearly 38
million occurrences for 5,710 species. Records were sorted by the
generalizations applied, publisher, country of occurrence (country
code), and publishing country. Species were categorized as those having
either generalized or not generalized occurrences (Figure 2). A species
would be considered as being generalized if all or some of its
occurrence data had been generalized, and not generalized if none of its
occurrence data had been generalized i.e. none of the 5 DwC terms above
had been populated for each occurrence.

We found that a remarkable proportion of these occurrences (91.6per
cent) were published only by 9 countries (the United States, Sweden,
Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, France, Australia and the United
Kingdom). When we examined the use of the DG term across countries,
there were clear differences. For example, Belgium used DG for over 90
per cent of the occurrences for sensitive species followed by the
Netherlands (81 per cent) and Switzerland (69 per cent). Nearly 90 per
cent of occurrences from Belgium made use of WH, and 91 per cent of the
records related to sensitive species from Finland used FT.

image:media/image1.png[image,width=624,height=352]

image:media/image6.png[image,width=624,height=352]

_Figure 2: Generalization of records according to their potential
sensitivity and conservation category. Bars represent the proportions of
occurrence records that had used the Darwin Core terms Data
Generalization (DG), Footprint WKT (FT), Coordinate Uncertainty (UNC)
and Information Withheld (WH). On the left of panel A are all sensitive
and potentially sensitive species identified by organizations and IUCN
(All SS); in the centre are records of all species excluding sensitive
species (Not SS), and on the right are overall records found in GBIF.
Panel B only includes only records of Threatened and Near Threatened
sensitive and potentially sensitive species._

The UNC term was the most commonly used term for species on both lists
and across GBIF, but tended to be more extensively used in occurrences
of threatened and Near Threatened species on the national and
organizational lists (58 per cent of the occurrences). For all species
identified as sensitive (both lists, all IUCN ctegoeries - 21,098
validated taxa) the UNC was used for 47.5 per cent of the records,
higher than when compared with the 34 per cent of records using UNC for
all GBIF records (Figure 2 panel A). However, the term UNC may signal
spatial uncertainties of short distances that may not act as efficient
generalizations in terms of obfuscation of species localities. In fact,
when exploring the generalizations of the records related to threatened
and near threatened sensitive species, nearly half of the occurrences
that made use of UNC term had uncertainties of less than 500 metres,
which do not comply with most of the recommended buffer distances
provided in guidelines (see Chapman 2010). The term CP was seldomly
used, and FT was used to the same extent as for non-sensitive occurrence
data in global GBIF dataset (nearly 10 per cent of the occurrences).

Besides UNC, the majority of records (82.9 per cent) of threatened and
Near Threatened sensitive and potentially sensitive species provided no
information for the recommended terms relating to generalizations i.e.
WH and DG (Figure 2 panel B), and, therefore, we assume that data is
being provided in its original form with no generalization as
recommended for sensitive data (Chapman, 2006). For records of species
in any conservation category nearly 90 per cent of their occurrence
records do not make use of either WH or DG (Figure 2 panel A).

There was little difference between sensitive species (no matter their
IUCN category) and those that were not sensitive in their use of the WH
term (8 per cent and 6.8 per cent respectively, Figure 2 panel A) and
between all records in GBIF and threatened and near threatened sensitive
species records (7.1 per cent and 9.2 per cent). However, threatened and
near threatened species identified by institutional and organizations
tended to have a higher proportion of records with any of the
generalization terms.

We identified only 362 species where all their occurrences had been
generalized using WH and/or DG**.** These species with all occurrences
generalized tend to have a lower average number of occurrences published
(7.6), compared with the average number of occurrences for a sensitive
species (6,776) or with those species in which none of their records
were generalized (neither WH nor DG, 110 occurrences per species, 2,288
species). What we see is that data generalizations are exceptions, and
most records of known or potentially sensitive species are not
generalized.

In organizational lists the sensitivity is generally defined for a
specific taxon within a specific administrative boundary, usually at
regional or national scales. Therefore, we examined those occurrence
records of species on the compiled national and organizational list
located in the country where they are considered sensitive. We found
that from the 13.9 million records from globally threatened species on
national and organizational lists, 2.795 million occurrences (20.1 per
cent) are from the country or region in which they were identified as
sensitive. We found that for occurrences of species in countries in
which they are considered as sensitive, 13 per cent used the WH term and
10 per cent the DG term, (Figure 3) compared with the 11 and 15 per cent
of occurrences in all countries (Figure 2) .

Most of these occurrences were published by organizations within the
same country in which the occurrence was located, with only 3 per cent
of these occurrence records (nearly 770 thousand) identified as
repatriated i.e. coming from data publishers not within the country in
which the occurrence was recorded. These repatriated records were more
likely to be generalized when compared with non-repatriated records,
with 55 per cent of the repatriated records using WH (compared with 8
per cent of non-repatriated records) and 47 per cent using DG (compared
with 8 per cent of non repatriated, Figure 3). The causes of these
differences between levels of generalization between repatriated and
non-repatriated records may be due to higher levels of sensitivity when
publishing data across international borders, or a need for
strengthening capacity for generalizing data at national levels. In
addition, besides WH and DG some countries may be using other terms to
generalize occurrences, such as FT, widely used in records published by
Finland.

image:media/image7.png[image,width=454,height=292]

_Figure 2. Records of species identified as sensitive by institutions
and organizations, only including those located in the regions in which
they are considered sensitive. Among the near 13.9 mill records related
to species listed as sensitive by institutions and organizations, nearly
20 per cent are located in the specific regions in which they were
identified as sensitive (2,8 mill). Most of them are published by
publishers of the same country in which they are defined as sensitive
(2.7 mill). Repatriated records of sensitive species occurring in the
areas in which they are considered sensitive tend to present a
remarkable higher trend to be generalized_

However, the resolution of this analysis at a national level may not
have picked up more fine scale temporal and geographical parameters
defined within national sensitive species lists that could lead to our
under- or over-estimation of generalization at a national scale. For
example, _Egernia stokesii_ is only considered sensitive in Western
Australia and would only need to be generalized within that
administration boundaries. Our analysis looked at records for _Egernia
stokesii_ across all of Australia with no fine-scale regional filtering.
Another example is the Finnish Biodiversity Information Facility
(FinBIF) sensitive species list that specifies not only smaller
administrative boundaries but also specific seasons in which the
occurrence of a species is considered sensitive data, and the
generalizations only apply in that particular period.

The WH and DG terms can encompass a range of uses other than providing
spatial uncertainty or data restriction (see
https://dwc.tdwg.org/terms/). We explored the information provided for
the WH and DG terms by taking a randomly generated subset of occurrences
of our listed species in which these terms were used, resulting in
271,157 occurrences from taxa on both our national and organization list
and the IUCN-derived list. We manually explored the text provided with
the DG and WH columns, and categorized them according to content,
separating those that mentioned if the record was sensitive from those
that did not.

From the 271,157 occurrences, 187,007 had used the term WH, of which
only 3.3 per cent referred explicitly to data sensitivity. In these
records, the publishers mentioned that data was generalized (withheld)
to protect a species under conservation threat (PlantNet, France) or
referred to a sensitive species list (Department of Biology, Lund
University (Sweden) (see examples of WH text in Appendix 4 Table S3) In
the case of Lund University, the WH field was used for all species in
the dataset to highlight that occurrences of 3 other species were not
published because the species are considered sensitive. This example
raises the question of the role of metadata versus occurrence-level data
for highlighting sensitivities within the data. None of the occurrences
where WH had been used to identify sensitivity also provided information
for the terms DG, FT, CP or UNC, i.e., the publishers used the WH term
exclusively to inform sensitivity. Among the remaining occurrences with
WH that did not refer to sensitivity, 57.3 per cent detailed the grid
reference system used (e.g., ‘OSGB Grid Reference SO3574’), and for 44.9
per cent of the occurrences the publisher offered additional data under
request, such as morphometric measurements, necropsy findings etc. A few
records specified that the geographical locations were blurred “_as
required by the publisher”_ without indicating the reasons. Finally,
among the records with WH not mentioning sensitivity we found 12.7 per
cent (22,992) in which sensitivity was informed using the DG term.
Therefore, publishers make use of DG to record sensitivity while also
using WH for delivering additional information about the restrictions.

From the 271,157 occurrences, 107,046 occurrences used the DG term and,
in contrast to WH with a few occurrences mentioning sensitivity (3.3 per
cent), 70.5 per cent indicated data sensitivity. Most of the 40
publishers identified using the DG term in relation to sensitivity gave
the same information and text relating to the type and extent of the
generalization (in kilometres) and the justification for the
generalization (see examples of DG text in Appendix 3 Table S2). In
fact, 35 publishers explicitly mentioned the sensitivity of the species,
and five mentioned that the data was generalized due to the conservation
category of the species. Some publishers also detailed the specific
location in which the species were considered sensitive i.e., specific
areas of the country in which data is generalized. This was the case for
24 publishers from United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
(GB) and 12 from Australia (AU). The remaining records used the DG term
for providing information on spatial data and temporal issues.

In records with WH and DG refering to data sensitivity, we found several
cases in which specific national or local organizations were mentioned
as references (Appendix 3 Table S2) , which coincide with the
institutions from which we obtained the sensitive species list (Table
1), or institutions related to them (e.g., Natural England, Natural
Resources Wales, Scottish Natural Heritage, SINP, eBird Australia)
Therefore, structured local initiatives may be used by several
publishers to identify sensitive species and also to determine the
generalizations to be used, probably generating more safe records but
also preventing overgeneralizations.

=== Examples of sensitive species generalizations

==== 

==== Rhinoceroses

Species from the family Rhinocertidae are well-known to be a valuable
target for poachers and hunters, so we used them as an example to
explore the use of data generalizations on their GBIF-mediated
occurrence records. We filtered GBIF occurrences for the family and kept
only records with coordinates, excluding observations based on fossils,
living specimens and material samples. The resulting DwC archive
included data for six species (excluding extinct ones) (Appendix 4 Table
S3). Among those species (all with accepted species-rank scientific
names), there were also 5 subspecies with accepted scientific names and
two were included as synonyms In sum, the six living species presented
3,371 occurrences, from which we excluded 187 that were located in
countries outside their natural distributions (the USA, Russia, the
Netherlands, and France) and thus considered specimens from ex-situ
collections.

For the remaining 3,184 occurrences, 88,2 per cent were generalized
using the WH term, most of them (2,265) using the WH term included
explicit indications of sensitivity in the data e.g., “coordinate
uncertainty increased to __m to protect the threatened taxon”. Only 273
occurrences made use of the DG term (9.4 per cent), but none of them
referring to the sensitivity of the species, and only mentioning spatial
generalizations (e.g., “record obtained as a central point of a grid
with 15 minutes”, “randomly obfuscated between 5-25 km”). In 342
occurrences with no WH nor DG, the record informed UNC, ranging from 1
(12 records) to 12,000 mt 13 records), although most informing 250 mt of
uncertainty (220 records). Overall, there were 82 records with no
generalization informed (not using any of the selected terms: WH, DG,
FT, DP, UNC), which were related to _Diceros bicornis_, _Ceratotherium
simum_ and _Rhinoceros unicornis._

==== Orchids

Orchids are one of the largest families of flowering plants with nearly
30,000 species globally and commonly traded and are particularly
vulnerable to over-harvest because many species have a limited range
and/or occur at low densities (Hinsley et al., 2016, 2018;Fay, 2018).
All species are on CITES Appendix II.

We retrieved 16,647 occurrences of threatened orchid (CR, EN, or VU)
species in GBIF using similar filters to those for rhinos (GBIF.Org
User, 2022). The records corresponded to 250 accepted species, and 7
synonyms species names. Of these occurrences, 3,678 (22 per cent) had
used the term WH and 7,731 (46 per cent) had used the term DG. In
contrast with rhinoceros records, the mention of sensitivity was found
for 96.1 per cent of the records with DG and in 60.7 per cent of the WH.
All the records that used the WH to signal sensitivity were published by
iNaturalist, stating “coordinate uncertainty increased to __ mt to
protect threatened taxon”. The Swiss National Biodiversity Data and
Information Centres (InfoFlora) published the largest number of
occurrences (7,352), using DG and the text “in order to respect the
currently nationally agreed ethical framework while simultaneously
sharing scientifically utilizable data for large scale studies''. Other
terms were identified to inform sensitive data generalizations, such as
_occurrenceremarks_ (23 records) and _georeferenceRemarks_ (2,114
records). In total, 5,250 (32 per cent) occurrences of threatened
orchids were not generalized.

image:media/image5.png[image,width=511,height=224]
image:media/image3.png[image,width=81,height=31]image:media/image2.jpg[image,width=46,height=46]

=== _Figure 11. Rhinos and_ o__rchid generalizations in GBIF-mediated data. It can be observed that generalizations are different between the two taxa groups. In orchids, generalizations are mainly informed and generalized based on DG; meanwhile, in rhinos, the most frequent generalization is by WH data.__ 

=== Data management conclusions

This analysis was a first attempt to assess the degree to which
sensitive and potentially sensitive data is being managed across GBIF
and this initial assessment shows a mixed landscape. Firstly, most
occurrences that we identified as being sensitive or potentially
sensitive were not generalized even when they were on national lists
using WH and DG terms. While this percentage was higher for well
recognized species such as rhinos and orchids, even here significant
numbers of records were not adequately generalized. However, a far
larger number of occurrences did include coordinate uncertainty values
although these may be under adequate thresholds for effective
generalization of data. Secondly, when data is generalized, different
generalization protocols are applied by different publishers and this
may be affected by the country within which the publisher is, with
occurrences from some countries more generalized than others. Between
publishers, there is a wide variety in the use of Darwin Core terms for
identifying sensitivity at the occurrence-level with no fixed vocabulary
for the terms and a wide range of different types of information within
the fields. The use of occurrence-level indications of sensitivity
should be considered at the same time as improved sensitivity metadata.
Finally, when we have national sensitive species lists, data coming from
publishers outside of the country are more generalized than those from
within the country, minimizing the perceived threat of repatriated data
with respect to sensitive species data.

== References

Adams WM (2017) Geographies of conservation I: De-extinction and
precision conservation. Progress in Human Geography, 41(4): 534–545.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132516646641

ALA (2018) What is Sensitive Data? Atlas of Living Australia__.__
https://support.ala.org.au/support/
solutions/articles/6000195500-what-is-sensitive-data-

Angarita-Sierra T, Montaño-Londoño LF & Bravo-Vega CA (2022) ID please:
Evaluating the utility of Facebook as a source of data for snake
research and conservation. Anais Da Academia Brasileira de Ciências,
94(suppl 3): e20211043. https://doi.org/10.1590/0001-3765202220211043

Ariño, A. H. (2014) _Filling Biodiversity Knowledge Gaps: GBIF
supporting research for conservation management_. The 21st meeting of
the Governing Board (GB21), Dehli.

Astorga, F., Groom, Q., Shimabukuro, P. H. F., Manguin, S., Noesgaard,
D., Orrell, T., Sinka, M., Hirsch, T., & Schigel, D. (2023) Biodiversity
data supports research on human infectious diseases: Global trends,
challenges, and opportunities. _One Health_, _16_, 100484.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2023.100484

Auliya, M., Altherr, S., Ariano-Sanchez, D., Baard, E. H., Brown, C.,
Brown, R. M., Cantu, J.-C., Gentile, G., Gildenhuys, P., Henningheim,
E., Hintzmann, J., Kanari, K., Krvavac, M., Lettink, M., Lippert, J.,
Luiselli, L., Nilson, G., Nguyen, T. Q., Nijman, V., … Ziegler, T.
(2016) Trade in live reptiles, its impact on wild populations, and the
role of the European market. _Biological Conservation_, _204_, 103–119.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2016.05.017

Bailey, L. L., Simons, T. R., & Pollock, K. H. (2004) Estimating
detection probability parameters for _Plethodon_ salamanders using the
robust capture–recapture design. _Journal of Wildlife Management_,
_68_(1), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.2193/0022-541X(2004)068[0001:EDPPFP]2.0.CO;2

Ball-Damerow, J. E., Brenskelle, L., Barve, N., Soltis, P. S., Sierwald,
P., Bieler, R., LaFrance, R., Ariño, A. H., & Guralnick, R. P. (2019)
Research applications of primary biodiversity databases in the digital
age. _PLOS ONE_, _14_(9), e0215794.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0215794

Bloom, D., Wieczorek, J., & Zermoglio, P. (2020) _Georeferencing
Calculator Manual_. GBIF Secretariat.
https://docs.gbif.org/georeferencing-calculator-manual/1.0/en/

Borgelt, J., Dorber, M., Høiberg, M. A., & Verones, F. (2022) More than
half of data deficient species predicted to be threatened by extinction.
_Communications Biology_, _5_(1), 679.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03638-9

Bosman, A., Steyns, H., Muller, B., & Steenkamp, C. (2021) _NSCF
Georeferencing protocol V2.0_. Natural Sciene Collections Facility, NSCF
Georeferencing Protocol V2.0.

Boyd, C., Brooks, T. M., Butchart, S. H. M., Edgar, G. J., Da Fonseca,
G. A. B., Hawkins, F., Hoffmann, M., Sechrest, W., Stuart, S. N., & Van
Dijk, P. P. (2008) Spatial scale and the conservation of threatened
species: Spatial scale and the conservation of threatened species.
_Conservation Letters_, _1_(1), 37–43.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-263X.2008.00002.x

Chapman, A. D. (2006) _Questionnaire on Dealing with Sensitive Primary
Species Occurrence Data Summary of Reponses_ (p. 61) Global Biodiversity
Information Facility.

Chapman, A. D. (2020) _Current Best Practices for Generalizing Sensitive
Species Occurrence Data_. GBIF Secretariat.

Chapman, A. D., & Wieczorek, J. R. (2020) _Georeferencing Best
Practices_. Global Biodiversity Information Facility.

Contreras-Díaz, R. G., Nori, J., Chiappa-Carrara, X., Peterson, T.A.,
Soberón, J., Osorio-Olvera, J. (2023) Well-intentioned initiatives
hinder understanding biodiversity conservation: Cloaked iNaturalist
information for threatened species. Biological Conservation, 282,

eBird. (2020) _Sensitive Species in eBird_ (Science Conservation
Section)
https://support.ebird.org/en/support/solutions/articles/48000803210-sensitive-species-in-ebird#How-should-eBirders-report-sensitive-species?-

Efford, M. G., & Schofield, M. R. (2022) A review of movement models in
open population capture–recapture. _Methods in Ecology and Evolution_,
_13_(10), 2106–2118. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.13947

ENETWILD consortium, Jaroszynska, F., Body, G., Pamerlon, S., &
Archambeau, A. (2022) Applying the Darwin Core data standard to wildlife
disease – advancements toward a new data model. _EFSA Supporting
Publications_, _19_(11) https://doi.org/10.2903/sp.efsa.2022.EN-7667

Estrada-Peña, A., & de la Fuente, J. (2014) The ecology of ticks and
epidemiology of tick-borne viral diseases. _Antiviral Research_, _108_,
104–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.05.016

Fay, M. F. (2018) Orchid conservation: How can we meet the challenges in
the twenty-first century? _Botanical Studies_, _59_(1), 16.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40529-018-0232-z

GBIF. (2022) _GBIF Occurrence Download_.
https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.kbwbf3

GBIF.Org User. (2022) _Occurrence Download_ (p. 0) [Darwin Core
Archive]. The Global Biodiversity Information Facility.
https://doi.org/10.15468/DL.YYW5PJ

GEF Montaña. (2018) Monitoreo de fauna nativa del GEF montaña registra
presencia inédita de gato andino en el Cajón del Maipo. _Noticias
SIMBIO_.
https://gefmontana.mma.gob.cl/monitoreo-de-fauna-nativa-del-gef-montana-registra-presencia-inedita-de-gato-andino-en-el-cajon-del-maipo/

Glaser, A. (2019) _Plants and Birds Need Privacy Online, Too_. Slate.
https://slate.com/technology/2019/04/superbloom-california-nature-internet-collide-birds-poaching-science.html

Heberling, J. M., Miller, J. T., Noesgaard, D., Weingart, S. B., &
Schigel, D. (2021) Data integration enables global biodiversity
synthesis. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_, _118_(6),
e2018093118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2018093118

Heinicke, S., Ordaz‐Németh, I., Junker, J., Bachmann, M. E., Marrocoli,
S., Wessling, E. G., Byler, D., Cheyne, S. M., Desmond, J., Dowd, D.,
Fitzgerald, M., Fourrier, M., Goedmakers, A., Hernandez‐Aguilar, R. A.,
Hillers, A., Hockings, K. J., Jones, S., Kaiser, M., Koops, K., … Kühl,
H. S. (2021) Open‐access platform to synthesize knowledge of ape
conservation across sites. _American Journal of Primatology_, _83_(1)
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajp.23213

Hinsley, A., de Boer, H. J., Fay, M. F., Gale, S. W., Gardiner, L. M.,
Gunasekara, R. S., Kumar, P., Masters, S., Metusala, D., Roberts, D. L.,
Veldman, S., Wong, S., & Phelps, J. (2018) A review of the trade in
orchids and its implications for conservation. _Botanical Journal of the
Linnean Society_, _186_(4), 435–455.
https://doi.org/10.1093/botlinnean/box083

Hinsley, A., Lee, T. E., Harrison, J. R., & Roberts, D. L. (2016)
Estimating the extent and structure of trade in horticultural orchids
via social media: Social-Media Orchid-Trade Networks. _Conservation
Biology_, _30_(5), 1038–1047. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12721

Hochachka, W. M., Fink, D., Hutchinson, R. A., Sheldon, D., Wong, W.-K.,
& Kelling, S. (2012) Data-intensive science applied to broad-scale
citizen science. _Trends in Ecology & Evolution_, _27_(2), 130–137.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.11.006

Howe, E. J., Potter, D., Beauclerc, K. B., Jackson, K. E., & Northrup,
J. M. (2022) Estimating animal abundance at multiple scales by spatially
explicit capture–recapture. _Ecological Applications_, _32_(7)
https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2638

iNaturalist. (2022) _Obscuring Sensitive Species Data_.
https://www.inaturalist.org/projects/hdms-point-observation-database/journal/9042-obscuring-sensitive-species-data[+++https://www.inaturalist.org/projects/hdms-point-observation-database/journal/9042-obscuring-sensitive-species-data+++]

iNaturalist (2023) Frequently Asked Questions: What is geoprivacy? What
does it mean for an observation to be obscured?
https://www.inaturalist.org/pages/help#geoprivacy

IUCN. (2022) _Threats Classification Scheme (Version 3.2)_
https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/threat-classification-scheme

Kelling, S., Hochachka, W. M., Fink, D., Riedewald, M., Caruana, R.,
Ballard, G., & Hooker, G. (2009) Data-intensive Science: A New Paradigm
for Biodiversity Studies. _BioScience_, _59_(7), 613–620.
https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2009.59.7.12

Kéry, M., & Schmid, H. (2004) Monitoring programs need to take into
account imperfect species detectability. _Basic and Applied Ecology_,
_5_(1), 65–73. https://doi.org/10.1078/1439-1791-00194

Lindenmayer, D., & Scheele, B. (2017) Do not publish: Limit open access
information on rare and endangered speci. _Science_, _356_(6340)

NBN. (2019) _NBN Sensitive Species Policy_. The National Biodiversity
Network.

NSW. (2006) _Sensitive Species Data Policy_. Department of Environment,
Climate Change and Water (DECCW), New South Wales.

Powney, G. D., & Isaac, N. J. B. (2015) Beyond maps: A review of the
applications of biological records: Applications of Biological Records.
_Biological Journal of the Linnean Society_, _115_(3), 532–542.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bij.12517

Robinson, O. J., Ruiz‐Gutierrez, Viviana., Reynolds, M. D., Golet, G.
H., Strimas‐Mackey, M., & Fink, D. (2020) Integrating citizen science
data with expert surveys increases accuracy and spatial extent of
species distribution models. _Diversity and Distributions_, _26_(8),
976–986. https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.13068

Saarenmaa, H. (2005) _Sharing and Accessing Biodiversity Data Globally
through GBIF_.

SANBI. (2010) _Biodiversity Information Policy Framework_ (Policiy
Series. Digital Acess to Sensitive Taxon Data)

SANBI. (2016) _Report of the National Sensitive Species List Workshop_.
South African National Biodiversity Institute’s (SANBI’s)

SANBI. (2018) _National Sensitive Species List (NSSL) of 2018: Summary
of changes. Version 1.0_. South African National Biodiversity Institute,
SANBI. http://nssl.sanbi.org.za/

Schlaepfer, M. A., Hoover, C., & Dodd, C. K. (2005) Challenges in
Evaluating the Impact of the Trade in Amphibians and Reptiles on Wild
Populations. _BioScience_, _55_(3), 256.
https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0256:CIETIO]2.0.CO;2

Siler, C. D., Linkem, C. W., Cobb, K., Watters, J. L., Cummings, S. T.,
Diesmos, A. C., & Brown, R. M. (2014) Taxonomic revision of the
semi-aquatic skink Parvoscincus leucospilos (Reptilia: Squamata:
Scincidae), with description of three new species. _Zootaxa_, _3847_(3),
388. https://doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.3847.3.4

SINP. (2014) _Définition et gestion des données sensibles sur la nature
dans le cadre du SINP. Guide technique._ (Touroult J., Birard J., Bouix
T., Chataigner J., De Wever P., Gourvil J., Guichard B., Landry Ph.,
Olivereau F., Pichard O., Poncet L., Touzé A. & Lebeau Y.)

SINP. (2017) _Protocole dy Systeme d´Information Sur la Nature et les
Paysages_. système d’informa􏰀on sur la nature et les paysages (SINP)

SINP. (2022) _GUIDE TECHNIQUE SENSIBILITÉ DES DONNÉES À LA DIFFUSION
VERSION 2.0_ (Ichter, J., Robert, S., Touroult, J.)
https://inpn.mnhn.fr/docs-web/docs/download/404525

SLU Artdatabanken. (2020) _List of sensitive species nationally
protected In Sweden_ [Data set]. SLU Artdatabanken.
https://doi.org/10.15468/JWBTSB

Soberón, J., & Peterson, T. (2004) Biodiversity informatics: Managing
and applying primary biodiversity data. _Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences_,
_359_(1444), 689–698. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2003.1439

Tang, B., Clark, J. S., & Gelfand, A. E. (2021) Modeling spatially
biased citizen science effort through the eBird database. _Environmental
and Ecological Statistics_, _28_(3), 609–630.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10651-021-00508-1

Theng, M., Milleret, C., Bracis, C., Cassey, P., & Delean, S. (2022)
Confronting spatial capture–recapture models with realistic animal
movement simulations. _Ecology_, _103_(10)
https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.3676

Thompson, C. W., Phelps, K. L., Allard, M. W., Cook, J. A., Dunnum, J.
L., Ferguson, A. W., Gelang, M., Khan, F. A. A., Paul, D. L., Reeder, D.
M., Simmons, N. B., Vanhove, M. P. M., Webala, P. W., Weksler, M., &
Kilpatrick, C. W. (2021) Preserve a Voucher Specimen! The Critical Need
for Integrating Natural History Collections in Infectious Disease
Studies. _MBio_, _12_(1), e02698-20.
https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02698-20

Tourani, M. (2022) A review of spatial capture–recapture: Ecological
insights, limitations, and prospects. _Ecology and Evolution_, _12_(1)
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.8468

Wieczorek, J., Guo, Q., & Hijmans, R. (2004) The point-radius method for
georeferencing locality descriptions and calculating associated
uncertainty. _International Journal of Geographical Information
Science_, _18_(8), 745–767. https://doi.org/10.1080/13658810412331280211

Wood, C., Sullivan, B., Iliff, M., Fink, D, & Kelling S (2011) eBird:
Engaging Birders in Science and Conservation. PLoS Biology, 9(12):
e1001220. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001220

Xing S, Au TF, Dufour PC, Cheng W, Landry Yuan F, Jia F, V, LV, Wang M,
& Bonebrake TC (2019) Conservation of data deficient species under
multiple threats: Lessons from an iconic tropical butterfly
(_Teinopalpus aureus_) Biological Conservation 234__:__ 154–164.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.03.029

=== 

=== 

=== 

=== 

=== 

=== 

=== 

=== 

== Appendix 1

Appendix 1. Table S1: Conceptual framework of the main elements that
have been used to define sensitive species, based on Chapman´s data
generalization guidelines, complemented with additional elements found
in the literature. The table includes examples of the approach developed
by some organizations and initiatives. The specific elements proposed by
Chapman to define sensitivity are in *_bold italics_* and include both
biological and non-biological aspects. This compilation represents a
contribution to facilitate the development of protocols to manage
sensitive species data, particularly for data generators, aggregators
and repositories.

[width="100%",cols="14%,86%",options="header",]
|===
|Elements |Description of the elements used to identify sensitive data
a|
[upperalpha]
. {blank}
+
____
*Sensitive species – identification of sensitive species*
____

|

|Risk of harm a|
* {blank}
+
____
risk of harm is a result of the *_use_* of the targeted species, e.g. if
the species is *_hunted, killed, disturbed, exploited, collected
(individuals, seed, eggs), harvested, poached, traded_*. Also related to
the *_interest_* that the species invokes in humans (e.g., birdwatching)
or a *_perceived threat to humans_* out of fear (e.g., spiders), or
danger (e.g., bats, snakes) or as pests (e.g., badgers).
____
* {blank}
+
____
harm to the species is always *_intentional_* and not accidental or as
collateral damage of an activity in which the species is not targeted.
____
* {blank}
+
____
risk of harm can be from both legal *_and illegal activities._*
____
* {blank}
+
____
risk of harm may be considered for species with *_phylogenetic
proximity_* to a currently targeted species.
____
* {blank}
+
____
risk of harm is higher for those species of *_higher economic,
cultural_* or *_medicinal value_*
____
* {blank}
+
____
risk of harm is higher for *_rare, uncommon_* and/or *_endemic_*, as
these may invoke specific interest
____

*This elements have been used by*: GBIF; NBN (UK), ALA (Australia), NSSL
(South Africa), INPH-SINP (France), ERIN (Australia), IUCN, SLU
(Sweden), Laji.Fi (Finland), eBird

|Evaluating the impact of harm a|
* {blank}
+
____
*_intensity of the activity_ -* Does the activity have lethal or
non-lethal effects on individuals? Are all individuals targeted and at
all times of the year i.e. does the activity occur all year or only at
specific times? Are there specific life stages (e.g., eggs, mature
adults, juveniles) or sexes that are targeted that may affect the
demographics of the populations? Is the activity increasing or
decreasing?
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_ecology of the species_ -* to what extent will the species be able to
recover/regenerate from targeted use or disturbance? Does the targeted
population have a very restricted range that makes it more vulnerable to
harmful activities**?**
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_novelty of the species_ -* descriptions of new species can trigger
trade and overexploitation of those
species.[multiblock footnote omitted]
____

*Mentioned by:* GBIF, eBird, NSSL, ERIN, IUCN, SINP, DRYAD

|Conservation status a|
* {blank}
+
____
species is *_Critically Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable_* at a
global, regional, national, or subnational level.
____

*Mentioned by*: GBIF (criteria 4.2), ALA, NSSL, iNaturalist, IUCN, SLU,
DRYAD

|===

[width="100%",cols="14%,86%",options="header",]
|===
a|
[upperalpha, start=2]
. {blank}
+
____
*Sensitive data –* will the publication of the data increase potential
harm to the taxon.
____

|
|_B.1 Species features_ |

|_Ability to detect and track the species (detectability)_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
*_mobility_* - species with low mobility (e.g., cactus, molluscs,
sedentary species) may be more detectable if specific location data is
informed.
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_abundance and density_* - species found at low densities i.e.
dispersed individuals over a wide area may be less likely to be found.
Gregarious species with higher densities may be easier to detect when
compared with solitary species.
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_accessibility_* – some locations may be very remote or dangerous to
reach, limiting access.
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_territoriality_* - species with predictable displacements or
philopatry may make individuals easier to locate.
____

|_Time and location-specific factors_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
Does the data provide information of *_nesting/breeding sites_* of the
species?
____
* {blank}
+
____
Does the data provide evidence of a species during known periods when
targeted exploitation is higher eg during blooming __*,* o__r when on
targeted life stages e.g. eggs or seeds that may be harvested?
____

|_B.2 Data content and local context_ |

|_Public availability of the data_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
*_novelty_* – is the data is already publicly available in scientific
literature, news, social media, atlases, popular knowledge, legal or
illegal sources, or findable using an internet search engine? If its a
novel location for the species, it may be considered more sensitive
____
* {blank}
+
____
*_spatial resolution_* - higher levels of resolution / precision at
which the data is published may increase risks
____

*Mentioned by:* ERIN, SINP

|_Protection of the area_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
consider the *_effective protection_* of the area in which the record is
located
____

*Mentioned by*: DRYAD, ERIN, Chapman (2006).

|_Local legislation and conservation_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
consider the existence of *_species-level legislation_* that may locally
protect the species against exploitation
____
* {blank}
+
____
will *_conservation efforts_* be impacted or benefit from the data
publication
____
* {blank}
+
____
consider any *_local data publication protocols, guidelines or
legislation_* related to the publication of data related to the species
____

|_Potential conflicts_ a|
* {blank}
+
____
Considerland tenure, i.e, if the record is located on **_privately or
community-managed land_**s
____
* {blank}
+
____
check legal and social norms related to *_permissions to publish_* data
on that area
____

|===

== Appendix 2

image:media/image8.png[image,width=624,height=276]Appendix 2 Figure S1.
Number of species identified as sensitive obtained from the
organizational lists. Countries with dash patterns and those with lists
reviewed by the present report. The names of the countries are included
only for those with sensitive species.

== 

== Appendix 3

Appendix 3 Table S2. Examples of the texts used in the records reviewed
in which data generalization (DG) or data withheld (WH) were used to
describe data managements due to the potential sensitivity of the
species.

[width="100%",cols="9%,23%,29%,12%,12%,8%,7%",options="header",]
|===
|DWCA Term |Text |Comment |Publisher/institution |Species |IUCN
Conservation Category |Country of the occurrence
|DG |Geographic information generalized during aggregation due to the
sensitivity of the data to diffusion, according to SINP communication
rules |Many records are published following the same text-forma. Text
given in French and English |UMS PatriNat (OFB-CNRS- MNHN) |Tetrax
tetrax |NT |France

|DG |Location in England is already generalized to 0.01 degrees.
Sensitive in ENGLAND, Name: England, Zone: COUNTRY [Sensitive, Natural
England] |Many records are published following the same text-format, and
modifying the location, extent of generalization, area in which the
taxon is sensitive, and the reference (in this case Natural England)
|Biological Records Centre |Lutra lutra |NT |England

|DG |Record is Australia in Endangered. Generalized to 10km by Birds
Australia. |Many records are published following the same text-format,
and modifying the conservation category, extent of generalization and
the reference (in this case, Birds Australia) |NSW Bird Atlassers
|Dasyornis brachypterus |EN |Australia

|DG |Represents an endangered/threatened species. The specific locality
has been removed to protect this species from over-collection. These
data may be supplied to researchers on request | |Landcare Research
|Pittosporum patulum |EN |New Zealand

|WH |Coordinate uncertainty increased to 29330m to protect threatened
taxon |Many records are published following the same text-format, and
modifying the extent of generalization |iNaturalist* |Spiranthes
brevilabris |EN |USA

|WH |Geographic information generalized during aggregation at the
request of the producer |Many records are given with the similar text.
Text given in French and English |UMS PatriNat (OFB- CNRS-MNHN)
|Neophron percnopterus |EN |France

|WH |Coordinate uncertainty increased to 30003m to protect threatened
taxon |Many records are published following the same text-format, and
modifying the extent of generalization |iNaturalist* |Ceratotherium
simum |NT |South Africa

|WH |Coordinate uncertainty increased to 30699m to protect threatened
taxon |Many records are published following the same text-format, and
modifying the extent of generalization |iNaturalist* |Ceratotherium
simum |NT |Zimbabue
|===

*As observed, iNaturalist used both WH and DG to describe sensitivity.

== Appendix 4 

=== Appendix 4 Table S3. Rhinoceros data. Total occurrence data found in GBIF for extant species of the family Rhinocertidae according to the conservation status and to what extent information was provided on data generalizations (DG and WH) for those species. Text information provided with the terms is provided in parentheses. Note that Diceros bicornis presents two conservation categories, explained by the two recognized subspecies with different categories.

[width="100%",cols="24%,15%,12%,16%,19%,14%",options="header",]
|===
|*Species and conservation category* |*Conservation category* |*N Occ*
|*N Occ DG* |*N Occ WH* |*N Occ not generalized*
|(Northern white rhinoceros) _Ceratotherium cottoni_ |Critically
endangered |4 |0 |4 (to protect taxon) |0

|(Sumatran rhinoceros) _Dicerorhinus sumatrensis_ |Critically endangered
|1 |0 |1 (to protect taxon) |0

a|
(Black rhino)

_Diceros bicornis_

|Critically endangered |906 |273 (no mention sensitivity) |495 (to
protect taxon) |137 (15.1%)

|(Javan rhinoceros) _Rhinoceros sondaicus_ |Critically endangered |1 |0
|1 (to protect taxon) |0

|(Indian rhinoceros) _Rhinoceros unicornis_ |Vulnerable |351 |25 (to
maintain geoprivacy) |315 (to protect taxon, requested by observer) |36
(10.3%)

|__(__White rhino) _Ceratotherium simum_ |Near threatened |1,762 |0
|1,594 |168 (9.5%)

|_Diceros bicornis bicornis_ |Near threatened |158 |0 |158 (to protect
taxon) |0

|*Total* | |*3,183* |*288* |*2,569* |*341 (10.7%)*
|===

*Only considering DG and WH

== 

== 
