=== Examples of sensitive species generalizations

==== 

==== Rhinoceroses

Species from the family Rhinocertidae are well-known to be a valuable
target for poachers and hunters, so we used them as an example to
explore the use of data generalizations on their GBIF-mediated
occurrence records. We filtered GBIF occurrences for the family and kept
only records with coordinates, excluding observations based on fossils,
living specimens and material samples. The resulting DwC archive
included data for six species (excluding extinct ones) (Appendix 4 Table
S3). Among those species (all with accepted species-rank scientific
names), there were also 5 subspecies with accepted scientific names and
two were included as synonyms In sum, the six living species presented
3,371 occurrences, from which we excluded 187 that were located in
countries outside their natural distributions (the USA, Russia, the
Netherlands, and France) and thus considered specimens from ex-situ
collections.

For the remaining 3,184 occurrences, 88,2 per cent were generalized
using the WH term, most of them (2,265) using the WH term included
explicit indications of sensitivity in the data e.g., “coordinate
uncertainty increased to __m to protect the threatened taxon”. Only 273
occurrences made use of the DG term (9.4 per cent), but none of them
referring to the sensitivity of the species, and only mentioning spatial
generalizations (e.g., “record obtained as a central point of a grid
with 15 minutes”, “randomly obfuscated between 5-25 km”). In 342
occurrences with no WH nor DG, the record informed UNC, ranging from 1
(12 records) to 12,000 mt 13 records), although most informing 250 mt of
uncertainty (220 records). Overall, there were 82 records with no
generalization informed (not using any of the selected terms: WH, DG,
FT, DP, UNC), which were related to _Diceros bicornis_, _Ceratotherium
simum_ and _Rhinoceros unicornis._

==== Orchids

Orchids are one of the largest families of flowering plants with nearly
30,000 species globally and commonly traded and are particularly
vulnerable to over-harvest because many species have a limited range
and/or occur at low densities (Hinsley et al., 2016, 2018;Fay, 2018).
All species are on CITES Appendix II.

We retrieved 16,647 occurrences of threatened orchid (CR, EN, or VU)
species in GBIF using similar filters to those for rhinos (GBIF.Org
User, 2022). The records corresponded to 250 accepted species, and 7
synonyms species names. Of these occurrences, 3,678 (22 per cent) had
used the term WH and 7,731 (46 per cent) had used the term DG. In
contrast with rhinoceros records, the mention of sensitivity was found
for 96.1 per cent of the records with DG and in 60.7 per cent of the WH.
All the records that used the WH to signal sensitivity were published by
iNaturalist, stating “coordinate uncertainty increased to __ mt to
protect threatened taxon”. The Swiss National Biodiversity Data and
Information Centres (InfoFlora) published the largest number of
occurrences (7,352), using DG and the text “in order to respect the
currently nationally agreed ethical framework while simultaneously
sharing scientifically utilizable data for large scale studies''. Other
terms were identified to inform sensitive data generalizations, such as
_occurrenceremarks_ (23 records) and _georeferenceRemarks_ (2,114
records). In total, 5,250 (32 per cent) occurrences of threatened
orchids were not generalized.

image:media/image5.png[image,width=511,height=224]
image:media/image3.png[image,width=81,height=31]image:media/image2.jpg[image,width=46,height=46]

=== _Figure 11. Rhinos and_ o__rchid generalizations in GBIF-mediated data. It can be observed that generalizations are different between the two taxa groups. In orchids, generalizations are mainly informed and generalized based on DG; meanwhile, in rhinos, the most frequent generalization is by WH data.__ 

=== Data management conclusions

This analysis was a first attempt to assess the degree to which
sensitive and potentially sensitive data is being managed across GBIF
and this initial assessment shows a mixed landscape. Firstly, most
occurrences that we identified as being sensitive or potentially
sensitive were not generalized even when they were on national lists
using WH and DG terms. While this percentage was higher for well
recognized species such as rhinos and orchids, even here significant
numbers of records were not adequately generalized. However, a far
larger number of occurrences did include coordinate uncertainty values
although these may be under adequate thresholds for effective
generalization of data. Secondly, when data is generalized, different
generalization protocols are applied by different publishers and this
may be affected by the country within which the publisher is, with
occurrences from some countries more generalized than others. Between
publishers, there is a wide variety in the use of Darwin Core terms for
identifying sensitivity at the occurrence-level with no fixed vocabulary
for the terms and a wide range of different types of information within
the fields. The use of occurrence-level indications of sensitivity
should be considered at the same time as improved sensitivity metadata.
Finally, when we have national sensitive species lists, data coming from
publishers outside of the country are more generalized than those from
within the country, minimizing the perceived threat of repatriated data
with respect to sensitive species data.
