=== Organizational and National/Subnational Sensitive Species Data Frameworks

The identification of potentially sensitive species and sensitive data
may take diverse approaches and frameworks, ranging from simple binary
decision to more complex multi step processes (e.g. SANBI, 2018; SINP,
2017). The elaboration of sensitive species lists are, in general,
collaborative in nature, and their level of complexity varies between
countries and organizations. For example, organizations such as SINP
(France) and SANBI (South Africa) have established working groups that
develop sensitive species lists and their associated generalization
protocols (Table 1). Some of these working groups allow for these
processes to be consultative and across a broad range of stakeholders.
SANBI and iNaturalist also provide user feedback mechanisms with which
the user community can inform those organizations regarding concerns
about the classification of species as sensitive. These lists are often
dynamic and reflect current changes to pressures at national or regional
levels. For example, SANBIÂ´s working group periodically reviews the list
as new information becomes available, resulting in a dynamic list where
the number of species can change (504 in 2010, reduced to 129 in 2018)
and a watchlist of genera which could become sensitive in the future
(SANBI, 2010, 2018). Only a few institutions, however, provide full
documentation of these processes. For example, SANBI was identified as
having a particularly well-developed set of documentation (SANBI, 2010,
2016, 2018).
